well we're joined Now by Mark oen Jones
associate professor of Middle East
studies at hammed bin Khalifa University
in Doha good to have you on the program
we'll talk about President Biden's
dilemas in a moment let's just talk
about the icj ruling at the moment um to
let more Aid in unhindered and there
should be a ceasefire I mean what are
the chances of this well let's look what
happened last time the icj ruled
provisional measures in January uh
actually there was a decrease in the
amount of Aid getting into Gaza after
that so just because the icj have have
have put this ruling forward doesn't
necessarily mean that Israel are going
to comply uh and let's not forget that
the am overall amount of Aid has been
peace meal we're looking at um a third
of what is required pre-war um the only
thing that will increase or has seen a
spike in Aid is essentially a ceasefire
so without a ceasefire we're unlikely
going to see more Aid going into Gaza so
the ceasefire needs to really come
before that otherwise what Israel's
response is just is just rhetoric I'm
afraid from what we've heard from our
correspondents just now is the bombing
continues the snipers are still firing
at Palestinians and the brutality of the
Israeli forces is quite evident on
screen with that recent footage that we
showed in the last 24 hours of two
unarmed Palestinians being shot on a
beach and their bodies being buried uh
it seems by a bulldozer uh in the sand
it's caught the attention of the
Americans they've been commenting on it
today is it just a comment well actually
I think it's a really interesting point
because we know as you said that
Americans I think are increasingly uh
frustrated by how Israel are Prosecuting
the war some completely hostile and the
polling suggested we've actually seen a
shift in public opinion in the US uh to
people opposing the war and let's also
not forget that for Biden Democrats even
opposed what Israel were doing in Gaza
uh 3 four months ago now that number is
increased but it's also increased among
Republicans precisely because of the
videos as you mentioned these brutal Vis
videos of for example Israel's
bulldozing unarmed civilians so that's
important but we have to also reflect of
there was a recent high-profile or kind
highly publicized resignation of a state
Department official this kind of thing
is also telling the administration the
Biden ad Administration that it's not
just Americans and our potential
constituents who are opposing this war
who we have to listen to but now
actually having people in our
Administration coming out saying we are
unhappy with the way our own government
our own employer is actually Prosecuting
or supporting isra it has to be said
that various State officials State
Department officials have been resigning
over this last six months this is
nothing new but there seems to be some
traction on this nothing new but the
public nature of
and as sheine the official said that she
many other of her colleagues had
expressed to her that they would like to
resign they just couldn't do it so she
was actually doing this in a very public
way as it happened in October so I think
this publicity is key it's not just that
there have been these murmurings and
signings of signatures someone is
actually going out there putting their
future career on the line as sheine
stated in order to make this point and
we can see that this has been getting a
lot of coverage in the US and this is
definitely going to I think embarrass
Biden and make him more likely to to
kind of pressure net y in the upcoming
meeting let's talk about that meeting in
the last 48 hours you know we've had
that turnaround from apparently the
prime minister's office saying that we
do want to reschedule the meeting that
we postponed because you didn't veto a
UN resolution that we weren't happy with
I mean one wonders what that Dynamic is
because the big talking point here is
that Rafa incursion that the Israelis
want to pursue and the Americans are
trying to re them back on yeah exactly I
mean I think nah who initially threw his
toys at the pram with the US veto he uh
he obviously wasn't happy about that and
he wanted to demonstrate to his
constituency that he was being firm with
the us but clearly Netanyahu knows that
the ability to actually go into Rafa but
also existentially for Israel relies on
American Support American military aid
and so he needs to go to to the US to do
damage control not only to try and
convince the Biden Administration that
they have a so-called plan but actually
to Biden to probably tell him hey this
is not going to happen or this can't
happen and then Netanyahu will want to
come back to Israel to make it look like
Biden is the one who is kind of snubbing
netanyahu's efforts to go into Rafa
because Netanyahu is trying to cling to
power here and he doesn't want to look
weak so if he can sort of push this onto
Biden and say Biden's the one who
stopped me then it helps him save face
somewhat and Saving Face is Going to Be
essential for what n needs to do well
Saving Face is very important for
President Biden let's turn to him
because genocide and starvation are two
words that the US Administration do not
want to be associated with uh but it's
something that President Biden can't get
away from I mean the new phrase is
genocide Joe has to go I mean this is
what Americans are saying saying at the
moment those that are um certainly
protesting against him as we saw on
Thursday night it's something he can't
get away from as we continue to head
towards November and that presidential
election of course and we've also seen
the protest vote in Michigan of people
basically refusing people who had
previously voted Democrat voted for
Biden places like Michigan saying
they're not going to vote for him or at
least not voting for him in those
primaries because of what he's doing so
this is a really important thing but I
think what the icj is saying this is a
reminder to not just Israel but to
people uh around the world to countries
around the world that they have an
obligation to try and prevent genocide
and the US by delivering Aid by air by
bridge to Gaza have basically
acknowledge that not enough is being
done by countries so they're implicit in
it and we also have to remember that the
US are actually refusing to use their
own laws which require that any country
that's actually interfering with the
provision of us Aid to a people should
also not necessarily be given arms right
so Biden is in a really difficult
situation because he's not only
continuing to fund Israel and us have
laws the Le laws for example that would
actually obligate the us to stop funding
a state that's engaged in human rights
abuses but also they're interfering with
the provision of Aid right so Biden is
kind of up against the wall here because
he knows he's banged to rights going
against US law in his continued support
Israel so he's going to be really
struggling to to to try and sell this to
to the US public if he wants to get
elected in November we shall see what
happens certainly as we have been in in
the coming weeks and months ahead Marco
in Jones thanks very much